---
CreatedAt: 2025-04-17
MOC: "[[ENG4U1 MOC]]"
tags:
  - English
aliases:
---
Book: [[Leviathan Wakes]]

*ONE THING THAT I NOTICE DURING READING IS THAT THE CHAPTERS ALTERNATE BETWEEN HOLDEN AND MILLER. THE HOLDEN CHAPTERS ARE ON THE POINT OF VIEW OF HOLDEN AND HIS CREW. THE MILLER CHAPTERS ARE ALL ON HIS POINT OF VIEW, DURING THE CROSSROADS ON PAGE 238, IT WAS VERY CLEAR*
**You need to include eight entries in your reading journal. Your entries will be based on specific incidents** 
**in your novel as well as interpretations of your novel as a whole. The eight entries are outlined below.** 
1. **Create a reading schedule.** 
	Read chapters everyday at lunch and if possible during class time
2. **A short written reflection about why you chose your novel.** 
   The reason why I chose this novel is because I have seen the show adaptation three times. The show is called The Expanse and it is currently my favourite show of all time. I wanted to see the differences between the two mediums. As to why I liked the show, I love sci-fi shows and movies; it is my favourite genre. What is different about The Expanse is that the show takes place in approximately 200 years from now. Humanity has colonized the solar system but it not like star trek where there is no realism. This show is for the most part, physically accurate, and has realistic conflicts that are similar in ones in our history. 
3. **Notes about character development in two parts.** 
	*What have you learned about the main character(s) from the first half of the novel?*
	- Detective Miller
		- At the beginning of the book, I have learned that Detective Miller is a good detective, but also detective that dives too deep into a case and has some internal conflict. Miller is a Belter; people who live in the asteroid belt and are oppressed by the richer nations of Mars and Earth. He works for an Earth company that manages the security of his home, Ceres Station. He feels conflicted with the fact that he is working for the same people who brought his people to poverty. Miller's detective skills are exceptional. He was trying to find the other main character, James Holden, and his crew after they supposedly escaped the destruction of two spaceships. He was able to distill that they travelled to the backwater Station of Eros and he found them at a very specific hotel deep in the station. On his search for Holden and his crew, he takes a wild guess and ventures to Eros to find Holden, “‘I hope I’m right about this,’ he said to Julie. ‘If Holden’s not there, I’m gonna feel pretty stupid.’ In his mind, she smiled ruefully *Life is a risk*, she said” (Corey 211). Miller kept seeing hallucinations of the girl he was tasked to find, and ultimately shut down. His wife left him years ago and he was been alone since. He wants something more to do with his life so he continues to try to find the girl to make him feel fulfilled.  "In his mind, she held him, her body against his in a way that was more comforting than erotic. Consoling. Forgiving. This was why he had searched for her. Julie had become the part of him that was capable of human feeling." (Corey 285)
		- Quotes
			- **VERY IMPORTANT: THE TWO TYPES OF MILLER ON PAGE 294**:
			- He was aware of having two different minds. One was the Miller he was used to, familiar with. The one who was thinking about what was going to happen when he got out, what the next step would be in connecting the dots between Phoebe Station, Ceres, Eros, and Juliette Mao, how to work the case. That version of him was canning the crowd the way he might have watched the line at a crime scene, waiting for some detail, some change to catch his attention. Send him in the right direction to solve the mystery. It was the shortsighted, idiotic part of him that couldn’t conceive of his own personal extinction, and it thought surely, surely there was going to be an after. The other Miller was different. Quieter. Sad, maybe, but at peace. He’d read a poem many years before called “The Death-Self,” and he hadn’t understood the term until now. A knot at the middle of his psyche was untying. All the energy he’d put into holding things together—Ceres, his marriage, his career, himself—was coming free. He’d shot and killed more men in the past day than in his whole career as a cop. He’d started—only started—to realize that he’d actually fallen in love with the object of his search after he knew for certain that he’d lost her. He’d seen unequivocally that the chaos he’d dedicated his life to holding at bay was stronger and wider and more powerful than he would ever be. No compromise he could make would be enough. His death-self was unfolding in him, and the dark blooming took no effort. It was a relief, a relaxation, a long, slow exhale after decades of holding it in.
			- **Detective** He is able to see through cracks in the mystery of the Canterbury’s and Donnager’s destruction that others are unable to see. His stubbornness gets the better of him. Miller as always trying to find the next clue to the case. Miller is a really good detective, found James Holden in a large solar system while Holden was doing his best to stay hidden.
			- **Julie** Miller was assigned to a case of a missing rich girl. He is very fascinated by her because she went from living well off on Earth to living in the slums of the Belt. He now sees her as hallucinations. He wants a comfort person as he is always lonely or with his detective partner. His wife left him years ago. Naomi says to Holden, “No, they were friends or something. He’s having trouble dealing with it, so maybe don’t push him too hard.” (p.249). “‘Julie was a good kid,‘ Miller said as if he were confessing something. ‘She flew a mean racing ship. I just… I wanted to get her back alive” (p.253) “*What am i looking at here, Julie?* he thought. *I’m seeing something here, but I don’t know what it is*” (p.262)
			- Everything was taken away from him, that chapter of his life was over, but he is still able to persevere “The man was right; it should have been painful. Everything he’d ever had was gone. His job, his community. He wasn’t even a cop anymore, his checked-in-luggage handgun notwithstanding . . . He probed himself like a doctor searching for inflammation. Did it hurt here? Did he feel the loss there? He didn’t. There was only a sense of relief so profound it approached giddiness” (p. 226)
			- On his search for Holden and his crew, he takes a wild guess and ventures to Eros to find Holden, “‘I hope I’m right about this,’ he said to Julie. ‘If Holden’s not there, I’m gonna feel pretty stupid.’ In his mind, she smiled ruefully *Life is a risk*, she said” (p.211)
			- He was tasked to look for a girl that caught the attention of those with much more power than him. ““ Miller gets fired but continues to look for her just this time without Star Helix’s resources. He has no idea who she is. Miller wanted more in his life. He was just a regular officer that was really good at his job. He is seen as boring to others.
			- Miller is the type of guy you want to **depend on** when you are in a sticky situation. He will do anything to survive. “Holden turned the guard around to face the door and pulled the handgun out of the man’s belt holster. He hoped all Miller’s threats were just threats. He suspected they weren’t” (p.273). “The citizens hesitated, then ran. Miller took a few cartridges out of his pocket and began replacing the three he’d fired. Holden started to speak, but Miller cut him off. ‘Take the throat shot if you can. Most people, the faceplate and chest armor don’t quite cover that gap. If the neck is covered, then shoot the inside of the thigh. Very thin armor there. Mobility issue. Takes most people down in one shot.’” (p.276)
			- Miller is not afraid of killing . “Killing another human being was hard. Some people couldn’t. The perp’s gun came around; the gunman dropped the woman and shouted. It turned out that, for Miller at least, it wasn’t all that hard. Afterward, he’d been through mandatory counseling. He’d cried. He’d suffered the nightmares and the shakes and all the things that cops suffered quietly and didn’t talk about. But even then, it seemed to be happening at a distance, like he’d gotten too drunk and was watching himself throw up. It was just a physical reaction. It would pass. The important thing was he knew the answer to the question. Yes, if he needed to, he could take a life.” (p.278)
			- “It wasn’t until now, walking through the corridors of Eros, that he’d taken joy in it. Even taking down the poor bastard in that first firefight had felt like the sad necessity of work. Pleasure in killing hadn’t come until after Julie, and it wasn’t really pleasure as much as a brief cessation of pain” (p.278)
			- “He wanted to think it had been finding Julie, seeing what had happened to her body, knowing he hadn’t been able to save her, but that was only because it seemed like the sentimental moment. The truth was his decisions before then—leaving Ceres to go on a wild hunt for Julie, drinking himself out of a career, remaining a cop for even a day after that first kill all those years earlier—none of them seemed to make sense, viewed objectively. He’d lost a marriage to a woman he’d loved once. He’d lived hip deep in the worst humanity had to offer. He’d learned firsthand that he was capable of killing another human being. And nowhere along the line could he say that there, at that moment, he had been a sane, whole man, and that afterward, he hadn’t.” (p.285)
			- In his mind, Julie Mao tilted her head, listening to his thoughts. In his mind, she held him, her body against his in a way that was more comforting than erotic. Consoling. Forgiving. This was why he had searched for her. Julie had become the part of him that was capable of human feeling. The symbol of what he could have been if he hadn’t been this. There was no reason to think his imagined Julie had anything in common with the real woman. Meeting her would have been a disappointment for them both. He had to believe that, the same way he’d had to believe everything that had cut him off from love before. (p.285)
	- James Holden
		- Holden is character that cares very deeply about his crewmates. He is willing to do anything to get them back, but he acts irrationally. He needs that voice of reason, which is his executive officer Naomi and later on, Detective Miller. After the destruction of the Canterbury, He desperately wants revenge, “but sitting here while the people who killed our ship keep doing whatever it is they're doing is making me nuts” (Corey 214). Holden is a righteous person, he will only choose the nuke button if absolutely necessary, "He’d done some things in the navy that had kept him awake nights. He’d followed some orders he vehemently disagreed with. But to lock on to a civilian ship with fifty people aboard and press the button that launched six nuclear weapons? He would have refused" (Corey 74). HE has also shown himself to be an excellent leader, Naomi, his executive officer, says “I want you to know I think you’ve done a great job of keeping us alive. You keep us focused on the problems we can solve instead of feeling sorry for ourselves. You keep everyone in orbit around you. Not everyone can do that, I couldn’t do it, and we’ve needed that stability" (Corey 217)
		- Quotes
			- Fighting for his crewmates, “This message is to whoever ordered the destruction of the Canterbury, the civilian ice freighter that you just blew into gas. You don’t get to just fly away, you murderous son of a bitch. I don’t care what your reasons are, but you just killed fifty friends of mine. You need to know who they were. I am sending to you the name and photograph of everyone who just died in that ship. Take a good look at what you did. Think about that while I work on finding out who you are” (p.55) He really wants to avenge them, “but sitting here while the people who killed our ship keep doing whatever it is they're doing is making me nuts” (p.214)
			- **He is a good person**, “He’d done some things in the navy that had kept him awake nights. He’d followed some orders he vehemently disagreed with. But to lock on to a civilian ship with fifty people aboard and press the button that launched six nuclear weapons? He would have refused. If his commanding officer had insisted, he’d have declared it an illegal order and demanded that the executive officer take control of the ship and arrest the captain. They’d have had to shoot him to get him away from the weapon post. He’d known the sort of people who would have followed the order, though. He told himself that they were sociopaths and animals, no better than pirates who’d board your ship, strip your engine, and take your air. That they weren’t human.” (p.74)
			- **Good leader**: “Okay, let me finish,” she said. “I want you to know I think you’ve done a great job of keeping us alive. You keep us focused on the problems we can solve instead of feeling sorry for ourselves. You keep everyone in orbit around you. Not everyone can do that, I couldn’t do it, and we’ve needed that stability.” (p.217)
			- **Afraid of dying???** “No. She had left him. Naomi had said she would, but confronted with the reality of it, Holden realized that he hadn’t really believed her. But here it was—the proof. The empty space where she used to be. His heart hammered and his throat tightened, breath coming in gasps. The sick feeling in his gut was either despair or his colon sloughing off its lining. He was going to die sitting outside a cheap hotel on Eros because Naomi had done exactly what she’d said she would. What he himself had ordered her to do. His resentment refused to listen to reason” (p.287) “The truth was he didn’t want to die. Even during  his time in the navy, the idea of dying in the line of duty had always seemed distant and unreal. His ship would never be destroyed, and if it was, he would make it to the escape shuttle. The universe without him in it didn’t make any sense at all. He’d taken risks; he’d seen other people die. Even people he loved. Now, for the first time, his own death was a real thing.” (p.289)
			- **Wants to save everyone, even those he does not know** “‘He’s dead,’ Miller said as he replaced the cartridge he’d fired. ‘Go to hell. We don’t know. If we can get him to the ship, maybe… ’ Miller shook his head, a sad but distant expression on his face as he looked at the child in Holden’s arms. ‘He took high-caliber round to the center of mass,’ Miller said. ‘He’s gone.’” (p.291)
			- Conflict with miller: “‘He’s innocent in this,’ Holden said, the sight of the injured and infected man making his eyes burn. ‘He’s innocent.’ . . . ‘Trust me,’ Miller said. ‘Dying is the best thing that could happen to that guy today. You’re not doing him any favors.’ ‘You don’t get to decide that,’ Holden replied, his tone edging into real anger.”
	*How have the main character(s) changed, grown, or revealed themselves in the second half?* 
	- Detective Miller
		- In the second half of the book, Detective Miller has shown that he is a rational being. The good of the solar system is more important than telling everyone the truth. He has a pessimistic view of the system and is able to realize that some things needs to be killed and some things need to be hidden from the general public. During his fight with holden, he says "‘Let me finish! And now you find some data that implicates Earth. First thing you do is blab it to the universe, so that Mars and the Belt drag Earth into this thing, making the largest war of all time even bigger. Are you seeing a pattern here?’" (Corey 328). Miller went from a person that would not sacrifice himself to one that ended up saving Earth from extinction by caring for a girl he searched the entire asteroid belt for; a girl that he does not know. In the story, Miller, “rocked her gently, like he had Candace on a sleepy Sunday morning, back when she’d still been his wife, back in some distant, near-forgotten lifetime.” (Corey 543) During** multiple incidents caused Miller to think about who he is and who he was a person. Part of Miller’s mind—the part that was still a cop and not a soldier—twitched at that. They were civilians. Killing them was, at the very least, bad form. But then Julie whispered in the back of his mind, No one here is innocent, and he had to agree" (Corey 405)
		- Quotes
			- Miller has shown himself to be a stubborn person, a very rational being. He is able to realize that the world is not sunshine and rainbows. 
			- **Sentimental** - “He wondered what his old partners would have made of his behavior on Eros. Havelock. Muss. He tried to imagine them in his place. He’d killed people, and he’d done it cold. Eros had been a kill box, and when the people in charge of the law wanted you dead, the law didn’t apply anymore. And some of the dead assholes had been the ones who’d killed Julie.” (p.318) “So. Revenge killing. Was he really down to revenge killing? That was a sad thought. He tried to imagine Julie sitting beside him the way Naomi had with Holden. It was like she’d been waiting for the invitation. Julie Mao, who he’d never really known. She raised a hand in greeting. And what about us? he asked her as he looked into her dark, unreal eyes. Do I love you, or do I just want to love you so bad I can’t tell the difference?” (p.318)
			- **Rational** - “‘You found a Martian battery, right? So you told everyone in the solar system about it and started the single largest war in human history. Only turns out the Martians maybe weren’t the ones that left it there. Then, a bunch of mystery ships kill the Donnager, which Mars blames on the Belt, only, dammit, the Belt didn’t even know it was capable of killing a Martian battle cruiser.’ . . . ‘Let me finish! And now you find some data that implicates Earth. First thing you do is blab it to the universe, so that Mars and the Belt drag Earth into this thing, making the largest war of all time even bigger. Are you seeing a pattern here?’” (p.328)
			- “‘Yes,’ she said. ‘He’s totally uncompromising too, but he has different ideas on how things work. You hate that. To Miller, Dresden was an active threat to the ship. Every second he stayed alive endangered everyone else around him. To Miller, it was self-defense.’” (p.479)
			- “‘Yeah,’ Miller said, ‘because telling everyone there’s an alien virus that wants to kill them all is a great way to maintain calm and order.’” (p.362)
			- “When you’re a cop,” he told Julie, repeating something he’d told every rookie he’d been partnered with in his career, “you don’t have the luxury of feeling things. You have to do the job.” (p.520)
			- **Self-Sacrifice** - “I don’t know what’s going to happen,” she said. “No one ever does. And, look, you don’t have to do this alone,” he said (p.546)
			- **Conflict** - “Part of Miller’s mind—the part that was still a cop and not a soldier—twitched at that. They were civilians. Killing them was, at the very least, bad form. But then Julie whispered in the back of his mind, No one here is innocent, and he had to agree.” (p.405)
			- Finally found julie - . “Instead, he rocked her gently, like he had Candace on a sleepy Sunday morning, back when she’d still been his wife, back in some distant, near-forgotten lifetime.” (p.543)
	- James Holden
		- Holden has shown himself to be an emotional person, one who cannot think two steps ahead. In his fight with miller after killing Dresden, miller says, “Twice now you’ve had the choice of whether or not to break the solar system, and both times you’ve screwed it up. I don’t want to see you strike out” (Corey 360). He believes in a transparent society, one that does not hide anything from others. “‘People have a right to know what’s going on,’ Holden said. ‘Your argument boils down to you not thinking people are smart enough to figure out the right way to use it'" (Corey 363). Then miller said "Has anyone used anything you’ve broadcast as something besides an excuse to shoot someone they already didn’t like? Giving them a new reason won’t stop them killing each other,." (Corey 363) Holden needs that voice of reason because he is too naive He deeply cares about his crew and will not under any circumstances get them hurt, but he does believe that everyone deserves a chance to be heard, “‘You shot him in coldblood!' . . . 'What about a trial? What about justice? You just decide, and that’s the way it goes?’" (Corey 422)
		- Quotes
			- **Irrational & Naive** - “‘You’re telling me that I did this,’ Holden said. ‘That if I hadn’t broadcast that data, those ships would still be alive. Those people.’ ‘That, yeah. And that if the bad guys wanted to keep people from watching Eros, it just worked.’” (p.356)  
			- “Miller said, slowly this time. ‘Twice now you’ve had the choice of whether or not to break the solar system, and both times you’ve screwed it up. I don’t want to see you strike out.’” (p.360)
			- “‘You can’t just throw information at people,’ Miller said. ‘You have to know what it means. What it’s going to do.’” (p.361)
			- “‘People have a right to know what’s going on,’ Holden said. ‘Your argument boils down to you not thinking people are smart enough to figure out the right way to use it.’ ‘Has anyone used anything you’ve broadcast as something besides an excuse to shoot someone they already didn’t like? Giving them a new reason won’t stop them killing each other,’ Miller said” (p.363)
			- **Other** - “The bastard had no right to be comfortable. Condescending. Holden wanted the man terrified, begging for his life, not sneering behind his cultured accent. ‘Amos, if he talks to me again without being told to, break his jaw.’” (p.416)
			- **“Everyone must survive”** “‘You shot him in coldblood!’ ‘Yeah,’ Miller said. Holden shook his head. ‘What about a trial? What about justice? You just decide, and that’s the way it goes?’ ‘I’m a cop,’ Miller said, surprised by the apology in his voice. ‘Are you even human anymore?’” (p.422)
				- “‘We did our best? What the hell does that matter?’ Holden felt a red haze in his mind, and not all of it was from the drugs. ‘I did my best to help the Canterbury, too. I tried to do the right thing when I let us be taken by the Donnager. Did my good intentions mean jack shit?’” (p.511)
				- They wanted me to kill my crew just in case Eros can’t break fifteen g, and I couldn’t do it. The guilt and rage and sorrow played against each other, turning into something thin and unfamiliar” (p.511)
			- “Dresden wasn’t an immediate threat. He was just an evil little man in an expensive suit. He didn’t have a gun in his hand, or his finger on a bomb trigger. And I will never trust a man who believes he has the right to unilaterally execute people.” (p.479)
			- “If that science ship starts flying toward Eros again, I will throw every torpedo we have at it, and tell myself I was protecting the rest of the solar system from what’s on Eros. But I won’t just start shooting at it now, on the idea that it might decide to head to Eros again, because that’s murder. What Miller did was murder.” (p.479)
 
4. **Explanation of your novel’s biographical and historical context based on your research on:** 
	the life of the author  [An Interview with Bestselling Author Ty Franck (James S.A. Corey) - Amazing Stories](https://amazingstories.com/2013/05/an-interview-with-bestselling-author-ty-franck-james-s-a-corey/?utm_source=chatgpt.com)
	- James S.A Corey is actually the pen name for two authors Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck. The name was chosen to mimic the style of 1970s space operas, such as *Star Wars* and *Star Wars*. Both authors were born in 1969, the same year that the the Apollo 11 landed on the moon. This experience helped to shape their interest in space and science fiction. Abraham sometimes collaborates with George R.R. Martin, the author of the A Game of Thrones. His works consisted of fantasy series *The Long Prince Quartet* and *The Dagger and The coin*. Ty Franck worked in business before become George R.R. Martin’s assistant. He is a big role-playing game fan; loves *Dungeon & Dragons*, *Star Frontiers*, and more. He got into the science genre through books like *The Stars My Destination* and *Lord of Light*. He initially made the universe of *The Expanse* as a role-playing game setting. 
	the time in which the author was writing 
	- The book was published in 2011. In December of 2010, Space X successfully launched and recovered the Dragon capsule for the first time. SpaceX was the first private company to achieve such a feat. In the book, space is heavily privatized with companies like Protogen leading the charge. NASA retired its space shuttle program in 2010. From April to December 2010, Boeing completed its first orbital mission of the X-37B spaceplane, which tested the feasibility of reusable rockets. 
	the novel’s setting/time period 
	- Around 300 years into the future, earth was ravaged by climate change so the United Nations formed and emergency world government to tackle the issues, part of the solution was space exploration. This future does not have faster-than-light travel and has realistic physics. Mars broke free from Earth's control and became independent.  Mars broke free because of this new rocket engine that would allow them to access the asteroid belt before earth. Because of Earth's continued aggression, Mars was forced to focus on military than terraforming efforts to turn Mars into a new Earth. The first pioneers in the asteroid belt jump started asteroids like Ceres to be livable. These people became Belters. The themes present are colonialism, socio-economic inequality, power struggle, and deception.
5. **Analysis of novel using literary lenses. Examine how one or more of the following literary lenses. informs your interpretation of the novel:** 
	psychological lens 
	- Miller has a big fat crush on a girl that he does not now, is dead, rich, and way out of his league. It is also a bit strange that he is way older but i guess lifespans are longer 300 years in the future.
	1. What conscious or unconscious conflicts exist?
	2. What does Miller's emotions reveals about their psychological states?
	3. What choices does Miller make?  Are the choices moral/ethical?
		- Moral? HELL NO
		- Ethical? maybe
	4. What forces are motivating Miller?
	5. What struggle is taking place in the character’s mind between id, ego and superego?
	socio-economic lens
	- Earth - 15 billion are poor 15 billion are rich - literally
	- Mars - rich
	- Belt - poor all around
6. **Text-to-world connections:** 
	find two articles that connect to themes or topics from your novel 
	- Oppression
	- Revolution
	- Deception & Trickery
	summarize the articles 
	explain how it connects to your novel 
7. **Draw a connection to a related social issue:** 
	identify a common social issue present in your novel  
	complete three research cards considering CRAAP criteria 
	summarize your research 
	explain how it connects to your novel 
8. **Interview an expert connected to a theme or topic in your novel:** 
	create a set of interview questions to structure the meeting 
	organize a virtual or in-person meeting with your expert 
	record the interview either as a video or podcast 
	**SHOULD BE ARROUND 5 MINUTES**